[WIP] KU-212/Docs: getting started guide (#112)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/tutorial/getting-started.md

```

You should see `k8s is not ready` in the command output. This will
change once we've enabled the `network` and `dns` components.

### 4. Enable Components

With Canonical Kubernetes, you can enable and disable core components
such as DNS, gateway, ingress, network, and storage. For an overview
of components, see the [Components Overview](#TODO)

DNS resolution is fundamental for communication between pods within
the cluster and is essential for any Kubernetes deployment. To enable
DNS resolution, run:

```
sudo k8s enable dns
```

To enable network connectivity execute:

```
sudo k8s enable network
```

Run the following command to list all the pods in the `kube-system`
namespace:

```
sudo k8s kubectl get pods -n kube-system
```

You will observe three pods running:
- **coredns**: Provides DNS resolution services.
- **network-operator**: Manages the lifecycle of the Cilium networking solution.
- **networking agent**: Facilitates network management.

Confirm that Canonical Kubernetes has transitioned to the `k8s is ready` state by running:

```
sudo k8s status
```

Note: To disable a component execute `sudo k8s disable <component>`

### 5. Access Kubernetes

> Canonical Kubernetes bundles its own version of `kubectl` for managing workloads.

Reviewer: I would probably reword this. Maybe something like:

The standard tool for deploying and managing workloads on Kuberenetes is [`kubectl`][kubectl-home]. For convenience, Canonical Kubernetes bundles a version of `kubectl` for you to use with no extra setup or configuration. For example, to view your node you can run the command:

Use it to monitor and control your Kubernetes. For example, to view your node:

```
sudo k8s kubectl get nodes
```

…or to see the running services:

```
sudo k8s kubectl get services
```

### 6. Deploy an app

Kubernetes is meant for deploying apps and services. You can use the `kubectl`
command to do that as with any Kubernetes. 

Let's deploy a demo NGINX server:

```
sudo k8s kubectl create deployment nginx --image=nginx
```

> 

Reviewer: I guess maybe a brief line which explains what the above does? We don't want to be too patronising, but also this may be someone unfamiliar with k8s

You can check the status of your pods by running:

```
sudo k8s kubectl get pods
```

This command shows all pods in the default namespace. It may take a moment for
the pod to be ready and running.

> 

Reviewer: We also need to demonstrate how to remove everything which I guess would be step 7.

```

To verify that the pod has been removed, you can check the status of pods by running:

```
sudo k8s kubectl get pods
```
### 8. Enable Components (Storage)
In scenarios where you need to preserve application data beyond the 
lifecycle of the pod, Kubernetes provides persistent volumes.

With Canonical Kubernetes, you can enable storage to configure 
your storage solutions:

```
sudo k8s enable storage
```

To verify that the storage component is enabled, execute:
```
sudo k8s status
```
You should see `storage enabled` in the command output.

Let's create a persistent volume:
```
kubectl apply -f https://k8s.io/examples/pods/storage/pv-volume.yaml
```
This command deploys a pod based on the YAML configuration of a 
persistent volume with a capacity of 10G.

To confirm that the persistent volume is up and running:
```
sudo k8s kubectl get pv task-pv-volume
```

### 9. Disable Components (Storage)
Begin by removing the persistent volume:
```
sudo k8s kubectl delete pv task-pv-volume
```

Next, disable the storage component:

```
sudo k8s disable storage
```

Note: To disable any component, execute  `sudo k8s disable <component>`.

> 

Reviewer: I would also add the optional step of turning off k8s and also uninstalling the snap, just for completeness!

# Getting started

## What you will need

> - An Ubuntu 22.04 LTS, 20.04 LTS, 18.04 LTS or 16.04 LTS environment to run the commands (or another operating system which supports snapd - see the [snapd documentation](https://snapcraft.io/docs/installing-snapd?_ga=2.260591181.190515620.1707126165-607758451.1707126165))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An Ubuntu 22.04 LTS or 20.04 LTS environment to run the commands (or another operating system which supports snapd - see the [snapd documentation](https://snapcraft.io/docs/installing-snapd?_ga=2.260591181.190515620.1707126165-607758451.1707126165))
```

- System Requirements: Your machine should have at least 20G disk space and 4G of memory

> ### 1. Install Canonical K8s

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 1. Install Canonical Kubernetes
```

> Canonical Kubernetes can be installed with a snap:

Reviewer 2: Install the Canonical Kubernetes snap with:

```
sudo snap install k8s
```

> ### 2. Bootstrap K8s

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 2. Bootstrap a Kubernetes cluster
```

> Initialize Kubernetes on your host system with default configurations using:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bootstrap a Kubernetes cluster with default configuration using:
```

```
sudo k8s bootstrap
```

> This command initializes your cluster and configures your host system as a Kubernetes node.

Reviewer 2: Add a note that users can see `sudo k8s bootstrap --help` for more options.

> ### 3. Check K8s Status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 3. Check cluster status
```

To confirm the installation was successful and your node is ready you may run:
```
sudo k8s status
```

> You should see `k8s is ready` in the command output. You may have to wait a moment for things to settle down.

Author: I thought so, I'll move the enable component section up. We can always re-organize when things have changed.

### 4. Access Kubernetes
Canonical K8s bundles its own version of `kubectl` for accessing Kubernetes. Use it to run commands to monitor and control your Kubernetes. For example, to view your node:
```
sudo k8s kubectl get nodes
```
…or to see the running services:
```
sudo k8s kubectl get services
```

### 5. Deploy an app
Kubernetes is meant for deploying apps and services. You can use the kubectl command to do that as with any Kuberenetes. 

Let's deploy a demo nginx server:
```
sudo k8s kubectl create deployment nginx --image=nginx
```
You can check the status of your pods by running:
```
sudo k8s kubectl get pods
```
This command shows all pods in the default namespace. It may take a moment for the pod to be ready and running.
### 6. Enable Components

> With Canonical Kubernetes, you can enable and disable core components such as DNS, gateway, ingress, network, and storage. For an overview of components, visit:[Components Overview](https://change-me.com)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Canonical Kubernetes, you can enable and disable core components such as DNS, gateway, ingress, network, and storage. For an overview of components, visit [Components](#TODO)
```

> With Canonical Kubernetes, you can enable and disable core components such as DNS, gateway, ingress, network, and storage. For an overview of components, visit:[Components Overview](https://change-me.com)

Reviewer 2: also in other places, let's not add external placeholder links. a local TODO anchor is probably better

> With Canonical Kubernetes, you can enable and disable core components such as DNS, gateway, ingress, network, and storage. For an overview of components, visit:[Components Overview](https://change-me.com)

Author: Ah, okay that makes sense. Thank you!

> DNS resolution is fundamental for communication between pods within the cluster and is essential for any Kubernetes deployment. To enable DNS resolution, run:

Reviewer: maybe we should use storage as the example? or is that going to cause problems?

The Tutorial is supposed to be a guided, real-world walkthrough exposing how to perform basic operations (install/deploy/remove) and serve as a basis to lead on to other tasks. So the component stuff is indeed important here - we want people to know how to use the software, not just install it.

> DNS resolution is fundamental for communication between pods within the cluster and is essential for any Kubernetes deployment. To enable DNS resolution, run:

Author: The newest commit has a section on enabling a storage component and creating a persistent volume. 

I'm trying to keep things "simple" for this `getting started guide` and just create it and delete it. I think the storage tutorial should probably talk about mounts and the yaml config.

@evilnick Should we remove the `network` and `dns` components section now or only once the work on enabling it by default is complete?

```
sudo k8s enable dns
```

> To enable network connectivity and configure Cilium as the networking solution, execute:

Reviewer 3: We don't want to expose that Cilium is used as our networking provider (thatswhy the component is named `network`).
I'd refrain from putting this reference in the getting started docs (just my 2ct - feel free to ignore).

Author: Sure, that makes sense. I will keep it more general.

```
sudo k8s enable network
```
Run the following command to list all the pods in the `kube-system` namespace:
```
sudo k8s kubectl get pods -n kube-system
```
You will observe three pods running:
- `coredns`: Provides DNS resolution services
- `cilium-operator`: Manages the lifecycle of the Cilium networking solution.
- `cilium` Represents the Cilium networking agent.
### 7. Configure a component
???
## Next Steps

> Link to further topics (networking, command ref, ingress etc)

Reviewer 3: I'd remove this line - doesn't add much to the context as each link explains already the intention.
